---
layout: post
title: "What's Changed??"
date: 2015-06-14 20:00:00
categories: aide intrusion detection
---

For several years on my internet connected Linux machines I have run file based
intrusion detection software to make sure changes to files on those systems are 
authorized.  Having a server online without any form of file based intrusion 
detection is very silly.  Without knowing what files changed on your system how
do you know you are all alone on that workstation/server?  How can you feel warm
and cozy not knowing for sure what actually changed? 

There are several software packages that can do this level of intrusion 
detection, some commercial, some open source.  I personally like [AIDE][aide].

AIDE stands for Advanced Intrusion Detection Environment, and is a file and 
directory integrity checker.  What I like about AIDE is it's relative simplicity
and configurable.

Basically AIDE is capable of performing multiple types of hashes on files on the
file system.  You can pick your favorite hash(s) to use on the files on your 
system, such as md5, sha1, tiger, etc.  This allows you to combat against 
hash collision attacks.

Another aspect of AIDE I personally like is the ability to use regular 
expressions to specify which files and directories should be included/excluded 
from the IDS check.  

To get started, install aide (your package manager probably has aide), then run
the following command to initialize aide:

{% highlight sh %}
aide --init
sudo cp /var/lib/aide/aide.db.new /var/lib/aide/aide.db
{% endhighlight %}

*Very Simple, right?*

If you are using the Debian package it most likely will setup a daily crontask 
for emailing reporting to root@localhost.  If not you can make your own crontjob
to accomplish this:

Now to setup daily reporting, we just need to make a cronjob:

{% highlight text %}
0 1 * * * /usr/bin/aide -C
{% endhighlight %}

You will likely notice that you might want to not care about changes to certain 
locations.  You can ignore directories with this syntax in the aide.conf config 
file:

{% highlight text %}
!@@{TOPDIR}/path/to/ok/to/change/.*$
{% endhighlight %}


Hope this was helpful to anyone.

[aide]: http://aide.sourceforge.net/
