---
layout: post
title: "CORS in Golang"
date: 2015-09-26 20:00:00
categories: golang cors
---

## Dealing Ajax Cross Origin

Fairly recently at work I had the need to perform some ajax calls from a 
Single Page JS Application to a Go Web Service hosted on another domain, as
the enterprise spans organizations, and BLAM, CORS Errors all over my browser
console...

CORS stands for Cross Origin Resource Sharing, and consists of a handshake of
cryptic headers (usually) from a browser to a web api server.  The handshake 
isn't well known, and usually people just "enable" cors in the web server, and 
all is right with the world again.  Here is how the handshake breaks down:

1. Javascript Application initiates a XHR Request
2. Browser intercepts request and sends the web server a "Preflight" request
  * Preflight consists of sending an OPTIONS request to the resource with 
  "Origin" header set, and optionally other useful headers about the request which
  is to come, such as the Request Method and potential Request Headers
  * Server replies with the "Appropriate" response headers to the OPTIONS call
  stipulating what *the browser* should allow.
3. Browser gets the results of the Preflight and decides if the XHR Request should
be allowed.
4. Browser sends the request, or doesn't

## Preflight Request

This is really a strange thing.  Basically the API isn't in charge of restricting
the request, the API tells the browser what the browser should or should not do.
I had a hard time wrapping my head around this.  Below I will break down the 
preflight CORS request in more detail:

    OPTIONS /hello/4321 HTTP/1.1
    Origin: test.com
    Access-Control-Request-Method: GET
    Access-Control-Request-Headers: X-Z-Header

In the above, we initiate the preflight by making an HTTP call with OPTIONS to
"/hello/4321" with an HTTP header "Origin: test.com".  The *Origin* header is 
what tells the web server we have a Cross Origin request.  Effectively, you can
think of this HTTP request as saying "Hey, I am coming from X, What can I do on
this resource?"

The two other headers sent in the request ask more about what this origin is 
allowed to do.  *Access-Control-Request-Method* specifically calls out the method
the user-agent is going to request in the follow-up XHR Request.  In our example
we are doing a preflight for a "GET /hello/4321".

The second Access-Control header is asking if this domain can use particular 
headers in this request.

## Preflight Response

Responses to CORS Preflight requests tell the browser what the capabilities
are for the script from a different origin than the api servers.  Below is a
response to our request from above.

    HTTP/1.1 200 OK
    Access-Control-Allow-Credentials: true
    Access-Control-Allow-Headers: X-Z-Header
    Access-Control-Allow-Methods: GET
    Access-Control-Allow-Origin: test.com
    Access-Control-Expose-Headers: X-Header, X-Y-Header
    Access-Control-Max-Age: 3600
    Allow: GET, HEAD, POST, TRACE
    Date: Sat, 26 Sep 2015 19:27:53 GMT
    Content-Length: 0
    Content-Type: text/plain; charset=utf-8

As any good OPTIONS call does, we get a 200 Status OK response from the server, 
as well as an Allow header which specifies all the allowed methods for this 
resource.  

The CORS specific headers are explained here:

* Access-Controll-Allow-Origin
  * This is the first header the browser checks.  If the Server responds with 
  this header, and the origin matches the origin given, or "*" then this origin 
  is on the server's list of approved origins.  Without this, the browser MUST
  not send the follow-up actual request, as it was denied
* Access-Control-Allow-Credentials
  * This header indicates that the user-agent is allowed to attach third party 
  cookies, and or Authorization headers to the follow-up HTTP request, as the 
  server states credentials are acceptable from that origin.
* Access-Control-Max-Age
  * This header indicates that the maximum age for cached content is set to 
  this value.
* Access-Control-Expose-Headers
  * This header indicates the headers that can be exposed to the script from 
  this origin.
* Access-Control-Allow-Methods
  * This header tells the browser the list of allowed methods for this origin in
  the follow-up request.
* Access-Control-Allow-Headers
  * This header tells the browser the list of headers that are allowable in the
  follow-up request.

## Failure Conditions

The CORS processing on the server follows a very simple pipeline enumerated:

1. Check Origin header value if origin is allowed, if not allowed, stop, and 
respond without any Access-Control headers in response.
2. Check if the Origin is allowed to send credentials, if so, add "Access-Control-Allow-Credentials: true", 
if not allowed, do not send Access-Control-Allow-Credentials header in response.
3. Check the Access-Control-Request-Method, if requested method is allowed for a
given resource, respond with either a list of all allowed methods for that origin,
or the requested method.
4. Check the Access-Control-Request-Headers, respond with an intersection of the
requested headers and the allowed headers configured on the server.

## Failures in Current Implementations

In go, many try to "solve" cors with a Preflight middleware that has a global 
CORS policy.  This flies in the face of the purpose of CORS, which is to protect
Cross Origin *Resource* Sharing.  The spirit of CORS lives in the capabilities of
the individual resources.  This means you MUST have a resource aware CORS
implementation in my opinion.

## CORS in vestigo

I have implemented a per resource CORS policy, which extends from a global CORS
policy in the [vestigo router project][vestigo].  Below is an example.

{% highlight go %}
    // Setting up router global  CORS policy
    // These policy guidelines are overriddable at a per resource level shown below
    router.SetGlobalCors(&vestigo.CorsAccessControl{
        AllowOrigin:      []string{"*", "test.com"},
        AllowCredentials: true,
        ExposeHeaders:    []string{"X-Header", "X-Y-Header"},
        MaxAge:           3600 * time.Second,
        AllowHeaders:     []string{"X-Header", "X-Y-Header"},
    })


    // setting two methods on the same resource
    router.Get("/welcome", GetWelcomeHandler)
    router.Post("/welcome", PostWelcomeHandler)

    // URL parameter "name"
    router.Post("/welcome/:name", PostWelcomeHandler)

    // Below Applies Local CORS capabilities per Resource (both methods covered)
    // by default this will merge the "GlobalCors" settings with the resource
    // cors settings.  Without specifying the AllowMethods, the router will 
    // accept any Request-Methods that have valid handlers associated
    router.SetCors("/welcome", &vestigo.CorsAccessControl{
        AllowMethods: []string{"GET"}, // only allow cors for this resource on GET calls
        AllowHeaders: []string{"X-Header", "X-Z-Header"}, // Allow this one header for this resource
    })
{% endhighlight %}

It should be immediately obvious how you can specifically have more fine grained
control of sensitive endpoints.  A benefit of using the vestigo router with CORS
is, by default vestigo understands the abilities of the resources as it is doing
the routing and knows which methods are already implemented or not.

I have found this implementation of CORS in golang the most sane implementation 
and allows for you to follow the CORS specification better.

[vestigo]: [https://github.com/husobee/vestigo]
